---
layout: post
title: MTHEL 99 👍
date: 2021-08-09
---

MTHEL 99 is a math “refresher” course that is provided to undergraduate students during the summber before 1A at the University of Waterloo. The course content covers all knowledge that a student should know before beginning any math courses at Waterloo. Topics covered include: _Inequalities and Absolute Values_, _Radicals and Rational Expression_, _Trigonometry_, _Exponential and Logarithmic Functions_, _Polynomials_, and _Introductory Calculus_. Each topic has a corresponding assessment that must be completed with a minimum of 75%, and a combined average of 85% in order to receive a pass.

### **My Personal Expierence and Thoughts About The Course**

Completing the course was definitely beneficial to me. As an IB student who finished IB Math (Analysis and Approaches SL), working through the modules allowed me to ensure that I understood the material that I had taught myself. The use of CEMC resources to practice and teach/review content was beneficial to me as the format to input answers was identical to that found in the assessments, thus letting me get accustomed to formatting math digitally again. In particular, I found the _Inequalities and Absolute Values_ module and _Polynomials_ module an excellent refresher in fundamental rules and methods. I know I will definitely be coming back to the _Polynomials_ module to keep my synthetic division and polynomial factoring fresh. 

I would recommend all students who have been enrolled into the course to complete the assessments. Regardless of where you think your mathematical ability may be, completing the assessments doesn’t hurt. If you already know the material, each assignment shouldn’t take more than 45 minutes (probably less…)  to complete.
